

# Spectre meltdown

This is a side channel attack that gives secret information to an attacker while a program executes.  At a high level level, Spectre attacks trick the processor into speculatively
executing instruction sequences (branch prediction) that should not have been executed under correct program execution.  As the effects of these instructions on the nominal CPU state are eventually
reverted, these are called transient instructions. By influencing which transient instructions are speculatively executed, the attackers are able to leak information from within the victim’s memory
address space.


The paper gives an example of the following code:

	if (x < array1-size)
		y = array2[array1[x] * 4096];

For ease of understanding, say *this* is the code the attacker is trying to attack. If x is provided as a parameter by the attacker, then they can at first
provide x that are less than the size. Now that the CPU expects x to be of a size less than the array_size, it will run speculatively assuming that x will
likely be less than the size and execute the code as if it is. Now, when the attacker provides a value of x that is larger than size, the CPU will execute
the code and put in y, a value that reflects the higher value of x. This value is cached by the CPU.  When it actually does find out that x infact was
greater than the size, it discards all the register values that resulted from this wrong speculation and goes back to skipping this if condition. **However,
it does not delete the entries from cache.** *The attacker can now read the values from the cache and gain information about the memory contents of the victim program.*

Attacks that allow the attacker to read the contents of cache in such a way are called as side channel attacks. *The attacker reads the memory contents by reading the cache rather than directly reading the memory.*
