<h2> The joys of hdparm </h2>

While experimenting with my Device managed SMR drive, I had the fortune of using hdparm to erase the drive - I bravely attempted this to essential erase the cache.
This blog is for anyone who had similar wisdom to tread the path less traveled because thank God that sanity persists in most others (in comparision to me)!

Steps that I followed:
* hdparm --user-master u --security-set-pass <some-password> /dev/sdx // password cannot be empty!
* hdparm -I /dev/sdx  // you should see that the security is enabled!
* hdparm --user-master u --security-set-pass <some-password> /dev/sdx

This command did not complete for my drive. When I rebooted, the drive asked me the password and I could not remove the password by the following command:
* hdparm --user-master u --security-disable <some-password> /dev/sdX.

This was because, when the erase command fails, the drive goes in a locked and frozen state. To remove the password, you first need to unlock the security features.
I could only unfreeze the drive by unplugging the drive and reattaching it. I checked the status by hdparm -I /dev/sdX command and saw that indeed the drive was unfrozen.
Once that was done, I fired the following commands to unlock the security feature.

* sudo hdparm --user-master u --security-unlock <some-password> /dev/sdx

Next I removed the password by disabling security and voila I was back in the free zone that I longed so desperately to be in!

* hdparm --user-master u --security-disable <some-password> /dev/sdX.

